blog_builds/content/cool_stuff/2020-06-16-Cool-Stuff.md, before:

---
title: "Even More About Me"
date: 2020-06-12T14:45:40+05:30
draft: false
type: page
tags: [books]
---

<style>
.myDiv {
/*    border: 5px outset red;*/
    height: 630px;
    text-align: center;
    margin:10;
}
</style>

### Books and Stuff

**Sep 2022**: I'm currently reading James Gleick's book, [The Information](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/60765/the-information-by-james-gleick/), which provides a richly detailed history of humanity's relationship with _information_ of all kinds - oral, written, digital! I'm really enjoying it because it weaves a very diverse set of ideas, people, and locations together to tell the story of how we've understood, catalogued, and communicated our ideas over the ages, and how the media that we use for these purposes has changed how we think.

<img style="float: right; margin: 0px 15px 15px 15px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width="250" />

### Theatre

During my undergrad years, I spent a lot of time doing theatre with my uni's Drama Club. Some of my favourite playwrights are Edward Albee, Annie Baker and Will Eno. 

I directed three full-length stage plays, assisted on two others, and competed at national-level collegiate theatre competitions thrice. Here's a poster for the last play I ever directed, [Duncan Macmillan's Every Brilliant Thing](https://www.dramatists.com/cgi-bin/db/single.asp?key=5451), which we also adapted for a more Indian context. 

<!-- You can find some cool posters we made for my other plays on [this](../play_posters) page.  -->

<!-- 
| Every Brilliant Thing, April 2019 | Every Brilliant Thing, April 2019 |
| --- | --- |
| <img style="margin: 15px 20px 15px 0px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width=300  /></img> | <img style="margin: 15px 20px 15px 0px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width=300  /></img> |


| Incognito, November 2018 | Oh The Humanity, September 2017 |
| --- | --- |
| <img style="margin: 15px 20px 15px 0px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width=300  /></img> | <img style="margin: 15px 20px 15px 0px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width=300  /></img> | -->



### Other Stuff I Do

- Play tabletop games with my friends - I am particularly a fan of Catan, Codenames and Love Letter.
- Play 90s-style point-and-click adventure games. The mania began with Monkey Island, continued with the Discworld games, and I have recently been daydreaming about making my own games with Twine or something similar.
- Take photos of stuff, I really really really enjoy (amateur) photography.

Commit message:

Moving around stuff on About me etc.

blog_builds/content/cool_stuff/2020-06-16-Cool-Stuff.md, after:

---
title: "Even More About Me"
date: 2020-06-12T14:45:40+05:30
draft: false
type: page
tags: [books]
---

<style>
.myDiv {
/*    border: 5px outset red;*/
    height: 630px;
    text-align: center;
    margin:10;
}
</style>

### Books and Stuff

**Sep 2022**: I'm currently reading James Gleick's book, [_The Information_](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/60765/the-information-by-james-gleick/), which provides a very detailed history of humanity's relationship with _information_ - oral, written, digital, all kinds! I'm really enjoying it because it weaves a wide-ranging set of ideas, people, and locations together to tell the story of how we've understood, catalogued, and communicated our ideas over the ages, and how the media that we use for these purposes has changed how we think.

**Aug 2022**: I am chipping away at Jane Jacobs' excellent book on how we can build better, safer, more vibrant cities: [_The Death and Life of Great American Cities_](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Death_and_Life_of_Great_American_Cities). It's very life-changing in the way that it's really making me notice small nuances of the cities I've visited and lived in that made them the way they were! I hope to write a little essy about it after I'm done!

<img style="float: right; margin: 0px 15px 15px 15px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width="250" />

### Theatre

During my undergrad years, I spent a lot of time doing theatre with my uni's Drama Club. Some of my favourite playwrights are Edward Albee, Annie Baker and Will Eno. 

I directed three full-length stage plays, assisted on two others, and competed at national-level collegiate theatre competitions thrice. Here's a poster for the last play I ever directed, [Duncan Macmillan's _Every Brilliant Thing_](https://www.dramatists.com/cgi-bin/db/single.asp?key=5451), which we also adapted for a more Indian context. 

### Film

I love watching movies and thinking about why I (and everyone else) loves watching movies! Naturally, this has [bled into my work](/pdfs/2022-tropes-poster.pdf) but more than that, I love writing essays about [the films I've loved and adored](https://letterboxd.com/sachnish/likes/films/). One day, I hope to have an essay published by my favourite film publication, [_Bright Wall Dark Room_](https://www.brightwalldarkroom.com).

<!-- You can find some cool posters we made for my other plays on [this](../play_posters) page.  -->

<!-- 
| Every Brilliant Thing, April 2019 | Every Brilliant Thing, April 2019 |
| --- | --- |
| <img style="margin: 15px 20px 15px 0px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width=300  /></img> | <img style="margin: 15px 20px 15px 0px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width=300  /></img> |


| Incognito, November 2018 | Oh The Humanity, September 2017 |
| --- | --- |
| <img style="margin: 15px 20px 15px 0px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width=300  /></img> | <img style="margin: 15px 20px 15px 0px;" src="../../img/cool_stuff/ebt_1.PNG" width=300  /></img> | -->



### Other Stuff I Do

- Play tabletop games with my friends - I am particularly a fan of _Betrayal at House on the Hill_, _Codenames_, and _Love Letter_.
- Play 90s-style point-and-click adventure games. The mania began with Monkey Island, continued with the Discworld games, and I have recently been daydreaming about making my own games with Twine or something similar.
- Take photos of stuff, I really really really enjoy (amateur) photography.
